if you're eating the wrong diet things
probably occur that shouldn't occur and
I think most disease that we see today
you know has at least in some part a
dietary component everyone welcome to
hell theory
today's guest is dr. Shawn Baker he's an
orthopedic surgeon record-setting power
lifter one-time semi-professional rugby
player all-american track and field
masters athlete former nuclear weapons
launch officer and most recently the guy
known for popularizing the carnivore
diet and Shawn that's where I want to
start so the carnivore diet obviously
has gotten a little bit controversial
people are kind of weird about it I
would do I'll say I do what I'll call a
lazy man's carnivore diet so I eat
probably 90% of my calories come from
meats primarily red meat some pork what
is it that makes a carnivore diet so
controversial and why do you still think
it's worth trying well I mean first of
all Town thanks for having me on I mean
the carnivore diet yes certainly is
controversial because it goes against
what we've been told from a nutrition
science standpoint for the last you know
hundred years or so you know if we tell
people that you know meat is really bad
for us which we've heard particularly
red meat we've heard that for decades
now we've got people that are really
only eating red meat and what's what
would you expect to happen to their
health would be they would get very sick
acutely or even over a period of time
but in fact what we're seeing is quite
the opposite and I think that is
something that rubs a lot of people the
wrong way because they have a lot of
personal investment in a different
narrative and I think that is why it's
partially controversial I think there's
a sort of a comfort in saying that you
know everything in moderation in balance
even though we can't really accurately
define even to find what those mean
quite honestly but that's just sort of a
platitude people put out well I believe
in a balanced diet when I ask people
what does that mean to you and what does
it mean to somebody from another culture
you know they have very different
definitions and so we have to look at I
think the full spectrum of human
existence to say what is perhaps the
ideal diet and as humans were very lucky
that we have a diverse capacity to eat a
lot of different things doesn't mean you
know I would say that if
you were to take people from a hundred
thousand years ago and offer them to eat
Doritos and Twinkies they would
definitely eat them does not mean we're
designed for that that's really
interesting to me are there things cues
that we can look at a human to see if
we're a true omnivore and what that
means and yeah so I mean no doubt humans
are omnivorous I mean we clearly are I
mean we can look at every human it's
been on the planet we could say that
they've been eating a little bit of
everything the question is how much of
what is represented and so I think when
we look at how to determine what what's
something suited for really as a human
being what is the overall impact to your
health to your performance to how you
actually you know feel you know
subjectively and objectively you feed
somebody a certain night and see what
happens to them and you know I would say
that if you're eating the wrong diet
things probably occur that shouldn't
occur and I think most disease that we
see today you know has at least in some
part a dietary component you know if we
sit there and eat you know this modern
industrial diet of you know novel foods
that really aren't designed for us we
see what happens we see depression we
see autoimmune disease we see gust or
intestinal problems we see chronic
obesity we see all these things a lot of
these things we tribute to aging which
probably aren't really aging it's just
disease and I mean I like to use so the
world record for 50 for a hundred meters
sprint at 85 is about 15 seconds at 85
years 85 years old which is pretty
decent time and okay so I like to say if
you could run 100 meters in 15 seconds
you're probably on the right side of
being dead you know I mean this is just
a simple heuristic but it makes sense
you know you think about a wild animal
the weak the slow get eaten right same
thing happens to humans as we break down
as we deteriorate we don't get eaten by
lions we get eaten by disease and so if
you can maintain you know whatever you
were at say 25 whenever you're at your
physical peak you know and you can stay
as close to that as possible for as long
as possible you've not only in my view
prolong well prolongs your life but most
importantly prolong the quality of your
life you know prolonged your function
and there's clear evidence that
you know athletic ability lean muscle
mass it protects you from disease it
protects you from you know dying it
allows you to function better so I think
it can be as simple as that
how old are you 50 3 okay so talking
about holding peak performance as you
age I know last year you set the rowing
record and you're going back to defend
that again so that's certainly very
impressive
how do you maintain that peak level of
performance well I mean I mean just just
to be accurate so I want a world
championships last year I set three
World Records when I turn 50 when I when
I was at the World Championship in my
and I was in the 50 plus classes in my
age house but you know I mean you know
I've been training my whole life and my
cell like I one day I woke up and said
ha I'm gonna be a good athlete I mean
I've been consistently doing the basics
for 40-plus years and you know it's
something that you know it's important
to me I'm a competitive guy it drives me
it's part of my identity it's kind of
it's kind of built in at this point but
I mean I eat what I think is a very good
diet you know and I'm not promoting that
everybody needs to a carnivorous diet I
think there's you back off that because
there's so much backlash around or do
you back off of that because truly truly
it won't work for some people
no I back off because I think most
people don't need to do it I mean
there's people that are doing you know
you know largely well above average and
very good from a health perspective and
if they're doing great I don't see what
you need at you is the metric they use
cuz I know at least in the interviews
that I heard with you in particular you
don't worry about your blood levels so
is it that you just go hey how do you
feel how do you perform and that's the
metric you should care about so let me
clarify so I it's not that I don't agree
with blood tests or or that I haven't
checked them because I've done that
around a blood test because people were
asking me you know I hope countless -
it's no big deal but I think you have to
be very careful in your interpretation
of blood tests because you have to put
it in clinical context you know as a
physician I viewed you know thousands
upon thousands blood tests and very
often you'll get one that's not quite
perfectly within a standard reference
range and you'll say is that rule is
that relevant to what's going on with
that particular patient so we have a lot
of people
are kind of armchair quarterbacks trying
to do medicine with lab work and they
just look at these labs and say AHA that
one's out of range you must be sick and
that's not necessarily true I mean we
have to understand that many of these
labs have incredible variability you
know cholesterol is one of these things
a guy named David Feldman is showing
they you can change his LDL cholesterol
hundred points in three or four days and
so we're sitting there you know you go
on once a year for your annual test and
your cholesterol is borderline high and
your doctor says hey we're going to put
you on this drug for the rest of your
life when you could have come in three
days later and it would have been normal
your blood level of vitamin D can change
30% in a day you know within a single
with and within the course of a day so
depending what time of day you get it
drawn you know things like you know
cholesterol all these other ones they
change so much and so you really want to
know is what is going on chronically and
so I like things like coronary artery
calcium skin that's it's a cardiac test
you can take them looking at the calcium
in your heart it gives you an idea you
can run that test so it's a CT scan so
and I had that done about two years out
of the diet and coronary calcium perfect
zero no calcification very good metric
for assessing disease and other people
say well it might miss saw plaques and
so on and so forth but still the people
that have no calcium have the least
likelihood of having plaque or anything
from cardiovascular disease an easy
method is this waist to height
measurement you know we know that if
your belly is too big you know relative
to your height you're at risk for
metabolic you basically have metabolic
disease and so these things that are
more probably chronic representation
because there's a lot of people out
there walking around that have really
nice lab bags but they're not healthy so
the problem is when we chase lab values
rather than health we get a very
different different set of goals so when
you have somebody with somebody could
have a perfectly stable glucose for ten
years and they have hyperinsulinemia so
in the background they have disease they
have the pathophysiology going on but we
just haven't detected it yet so I think
that's a bit of a travesty quite
honestly so breaking out of that though
what should people be paying attention
to so things I've heard you say before
so okay we've got weight to waist to
height ratio
you've got if you're a guy are you
waking up with erections
you've got the calcification of the
heart like what are other things that we
should really I think I think insulin
sensitivity is prob
a useful metric I mean if you look at
the the relationship of pretty much
every chronic disease and
hyperinsulinemia we see a you know we
see a pretty consistent relationship now
again I sort of rally against
associations because there's some
problems with that but in general you
know I think those things are important
like I said you know you mentioned
sexual [__] that's very important I mean
it's some people laugh about it but it's
a very important why health why is it
important I've heard it said that
basically a rectal dysfunction is a
precursor to heart disease it's like if
you're having vascular problems there
chances are that you have a bigger
problem going on at the level of the
heart yeah absolutely some people call
it canary in the coalmine and you know
it you know obviously our male member is
a blood dependent that and so when you
do have when you do have impeded blood
flow you know in in any part of your
body it's probably help occurring
systemically unless there's some trauma
or something like that so we see that so
it is it is a concern for cardiovascular
disease so the fact that at 53 years of
age I wake up every day without a own
erection you know indicates which you
know indicates what's going on my heart
because you know as I you know I said I
had a coronary calcium skiing zero you
know what I'm doing athletics are you
asked your function I don't know if
you've ever met on one of these if
you've added CrossFit or something like
that with the concept to that they're
they're very challenging from a
cardiovascular standpoint so that's
interesting so talk to me about exercise
heart health obviously you're very known
for talking about diet but also I mean
just standing next to you you are a wall
of muscle so you clearly take care of
yourself physically you push yourself
one I think people like you said that
people look at aging is sort of this
inevitable thing but in reality you've
retained a lot of muscle mass so one can
we add muscle as we age to why does that
matter and then three how do we do it
yes so you know as far as can you gain
muscle yes you can definitely gain
muscle pretty much in any way there
studies in people in the 80 in their 80s
shown they can put on muscle mass now
you know this the formula for that is
pretty simple I mean it's adequate
protein adequate leucine resistance
training you know either either heavy
weight or light weight depending on
you've got to stimulate the muscles
maximally and then for many people for
most people it's at some sort of caloric
surplus and you can get that through
carbohydrates you can get that through
fat but beyond that you know what do you
have to do I mean at this point at 53 I
like to make sure that you know I've
spent some time dedicated to actually
getting stronger and it's basic compound
movements some time spent you know
trying to build muscle to maintain that
it's not that you have to have huge
giant bodybuilder muscles but having
lean muscle mass being in the top you
know there's a nice study at the
Honolulu longevity study looked at
strength in in mid midlife people that
were in the highest quartile for
strength had a 250% chance
increase of making it 200 so it's so
important to do that it's almost as
important as genetics what is it muscle
mass muscle density the ability to
contract the muscle because I've heard
you say there's not necessarily size its
strength is it that they didn't in the
study they didn't make a differentiation
between strength and size because if I
really think at a just a biological
level what's going on it would seem like
if you get really sick that there are
amino acids and things you're gonna go
down and strip from your own muscle to
recover from that and if you have no
muscle to strip then you're just done
but that would lead me to believe that
size would be pretty important yes so
there's a there's a clear correlation
between cross-sectional muscle area and
strength oh that's being challenged
we're seeing some some research showing
that you can be very strong with with
relatively smaller muscles so I think
ultimately when we look at the longevity
it's really strengths and really
strength to size ratio that's important
so you want to be lean and strong and I
think what strength comes function so
function for one is important you know
when we lose when we lose some of our
independents for walking again again
when we get to the end of life you know
we see people that lose some
independence with walking and strength
says plays a big role in that there is
you know it's not that you can you
there's no there's not there there's no
relationship between strength and size
so there is some
but the research has shown that strength
and I think quite honestly because most
of us looked at older people older
people are typically not bodybuilders
and so we're not looking at mr. Olympia
versus the the puny guy we're looking at
kind of normal people a normal
distribution we can say these kind of
you know normal people the ones that are
on the stronger end of the spectrum do
better than the people that aren't and
so when we see you don't have much
physiologic reserve particularly muscle
mass when we do get struck with disease
cancer you know infectious disease
something like that
not having that that sort of buffer that
the muscle provides tends to produce a
work at worse outcome yeah
that's super interesting I want to go
back and walk through the lineage of how
humans end up here so the evolution
question so one day I was thinking about
okay where do we fall in the spectrum of
what we should be eating and all of that
and I was like alright if we share a
common ancestor with monkeys and
chimpanzees gorillas whatever obviously
gorillas chew a ton like they're all
about leaves I know that chimpanzees
actually get some percentage of their
calories from killing other animals not
the least of which being other
chimpanzees so how much do you think is
is there truth to we came down out of
the trees as food became more scarce as
we started turning into hunters we find
cooking all of that stuff that allows us
to grow the bigger brain like what what
was that sort of rough step-by-step
process that you think led us to being
the omnivores that we are yeah so if we
go back even further
you know there's research now that shows
that the very first animals the very
first multicellular animals started out
as carnivorous animals and you think
about it when you're trying to build
structure it's very easy to take like
and build like and so when we go to a
different sort of building materials it
becomes less efficient you have to have
specialized adaptations and some averts
going back about 800 million years the
very first animals appear to be
carnivore and most of the animals have
ever been on the planet have been
carnivorous so an herbivore is a really
specialized adaptation grasslands
evolved about a million about a hundred
million years ago so we started seeing
the first larger herbivores come in then
but if we go back to primate evolution
about 25 million
you know we've had you know monkeys and
eventually you know the ones that are
still remaining the bonobos and
chimpanzees you know the gorillas
they've had 25 million years of
evolution to try and develop increased
brain size and they've been doing on our
fruit based diet it has not worked it is
not you know we've got 25 million years
to try and end doesn't work and so
something had to change to allow the
differentiation into what we are now and
so if we look back in the global climate
record starting between five and three
million years ago we saw a dramatic
shift in what happened with global
temperatures and so we went from a lush
tropical environment to a very much a
colder savanna you know type of type
situation grasslands and so if we look
at you know what people humans and pre
humans were experiencing it was more
kind of Canada and not Costa Rica so
we've got this situation where the food
supply is very different and some some
of the early you know hominids tried to
make it on a vegetarian diet there are
things like Australopithecus robustus
and Boise I and they would they just
went extinct and so because they didn't
they couldn't survive in the environment
so we've had you know in human evolution
all kinds of humans it evolved and what
occurred was you know as we grew this
bigger brain it requires a more and more
efficient effective caloric dense fuel
source and that was an effete and we
know that going back to Homo erectus
just with simple spear technology they
had no trouble killing elephants you
know that and that's what they usually
use was a you know their their food of
choice and even think about if you and I
were to be magically transported back
50,000 years and our technology with
Spears and we could say well you can
gather you know plants for three days to
get to get thousand 2,000 calories or
you can go out and kill one of these big
slow things it doesn't run away that
just looks at it because you know
remember these animals sort of evolved
with really no predators I mean they
look at me Lions might eat the small
elephants but beyond that once they're
full size like you know what are you
going to do to me being human so we see
that when humans in Africa they kind of
co-evolved and so they had this
abundance of food abundance of fuel
helped them to grow that bigger brain I
think that's what occurs in if we you
know with comparative anatomy if you
look at another primate and we look at
their digestive tract you know humans
have on an anatomic basis you know
looking at at you know what what the
hardware is not the software but the
hardware seventeen percent of our
digestive tract is able to ferment and
we compare that to a chimp or an ape or
urilla they've got something like fifty
to sixty percent of our gut confirm it
so we lost much of that fermentated of
capacity which means we cannot get a lot
of nutrition from fiber or you know
these are followed bores it eat leaves
we can't get much nutrition from that
it's one of the reasons why a
plant-based diet helps people lose
weight because they're just not
absorbing much nutrition so they lose
weight maybe they're maybe it's not the
best way to lose weight so that's that's
we just don't have that capacity anymore
it's really interesting now given that
we have the 17% ability to ferments when
you hear the standard advice about all
things in moderation like there's I
don't know something intuitive about
that that feels right I've never lived
my life like that but when people say it
I'm always like oh God like there is
something haunting about that and if we
know that we are omnivores why is it
advantageous to go so full on into
carnivore is there something that's
missed is it a complete diet could you
literally live on red meat forever or
are there times where you feel that it's
important to dip in and have some
vegetables because there are
micronutrients or whatever missing yes
so you know if you were to ask me what
is probably a realistic you know ancient
diet for humans it's probably a whole
bunch of meat and probably a few plants
here and there probably fruit being most
most common you know if you think about
what's available to you know fruit is
generally well tolerated nuts and seeds
you know without processing can be very
tight you know a handful of cashews raw
can kill you
five kidney beans can kill you if you
eat them unprocessed so you know that
was probably the basic diet now we have
so many people today whether digestive
decision probably destroyed by you know
I think seed oils and some of these
other products that we were exposed to I
think that compromises people so they
don't you know tolerate
toile is the big problem well so there
is some researchers a group out of
Hungary called the Paleo Medicine you've
seen a group and they've looked at gut
permeability and there's there's
something there's gossip called leaky
gut
so normally our digestive tract you know
we eat the food we take we absorb things
we want to take in and we don't allow
anything else extra come in there
there's some degree of permeability
that's normal but we get this
exaggerated permeability that occurs
when we're exposed to certain foods seed
oils this flag is one of them based on
their research when they look at they
say that some every time someone eats
seed oils gut permeability increases
significantly and that allows you know
bacterial endotoxins LPT
lipopolysaccharides other things to be
absorbed through them through the you
know the gut barrier and in a sense to
cause problems in the body whether it's
autoimmune disease or many other
problems and so when we go back to the
the baseline you know and I think all
humans have the capacity at least a
healthy human now there's people were as
they age we lose some of our digestive
capacity one of the common things we see
with people as they get older their
gastric pH you know goes up they don't
have the capacity to produce a really
acidic stomach environment humans have
the among the most acidic stomach
environments on the planet compared
almost any other animal we are on par
with things like hyenas and vultures
which were scavenger animals and the
thought is the reason we developed that
is because initially when we were an
australopithecine or something like that
we scavenged meat and that meat was
probably sitting out for a while it was
probably heavily contaminated so the
animals that had a more robust ph that
could kill that you know live doubt this
is in the natural selection sort of
theory on that but as far as why
somebody would do that
is it is it something you can do for a
long time I mean I've done it for three
years I mean I basically had essentially
only red meat with the exception of some
fish here and there's some eggs here and
there some spices in case I got to eat
in a restaurant and you know three years
in I'm wearing winning World
Championship so I mean if there's an if
there's an efficiency maybe it's a
ten-year deficiency I'm kind of
skeptical about that you know there's
people they've been doing this stuff for
10 years 20 years that are still
thriving and it's kind of interesting to
see and it just makes sense from an
evolutionary pause ability standpoint
you know what food if there was some
essential plant nutrients some essential
plant food
that you had to have to survive how
would you get from Africa to Europe to
Asia across the Bering Strait into
Alaska down down to North America what
plant would be there that you had to
have so I cannot think of if you can
tell me a blueberry is essential for
human nutrition I'm gonna say where'd
you get blueberries in the Bering Strait
50 thousand years ago when it's frozen
so I mean it's like you can always get
meat though yeah yeah that's it look man
so one I love what you're doing with the
end of one stuff and just I feel like
there's a whole movement happening right
now where people are going I get it like
there's no I don't have proof but I'm
telling you I'm living it and it's kind
of RAD so I I partly because of tape
well actually let me back up so it used
to be 60 pounds heavier but not in a
good way
all just fat a little bit more muscle in
fairness but mostly I had in putting on
muscle I was on a seafood diet so if I
saw food I ate it I've been on that one
yeah and it was actually I was eating so
much I hated eating it was just oh but I
didn't want to miss a second to put on
muscle so I ended up putting on a lot of
fat and I decide okay I'm gonna get lean
and I did I got very [__] lean and I
did it by basically rabbit starvation so
I was eating very high protein probably
eighty eighty-five percent of my
calories came from protein I tried to
keep my carbohydrates to zero and I
tried to keep my fat to zero so the 15
percent was like [__] sneaking in just
because I couldn't like not yeah yeah
you can't just eat the chicken breast
but I got as close as I could and I did
that for two years it got shredded would
be an exaggeration but I got very lean
six-pack abs the whole nine and it was
miserable I hated my life I was hungry
up around the clock and my wife and
business partners pulled me aside and
said you no longer have a personality
and I was like wow I really need to like
take this seriously and the big thing
was and I had struggled with this my
whole life so I didn't I didn't make the
connection unfortunately my wrists hurt
so badly that even in my 20s I was icing
them every night and I iced them every
night for about 15 years I assume so
much that I had
what looked like burn marks on the back
of my wrist and that was misery and then
I met Peter Atia and Dom D'Agostino and
they said man this whole Kido thing you
need to be eating fat and I just could
not wrap my head around that I was like
it's called fat it's gonna make me fat
like I'm not gonna eat the stuff they're
like don't be a dumbass eat it and so I
went I went fair up utak ketosis so I
was doing a four to one ratio it was
misery it was gross I'd the keto flu the
whole nine but within three days my
wrist stopped hurting and I was like
whoa it is the closest food-related
thing to having a drug like effect I've
ever experienced in my life and so I
went off keto for a year because I had
had such a bad experience with it but I
kept my fat high and my wrists have
never hurt since that was insanely
transformative and then through that
just because I'm super lazy I didn't
want to have to try to do it through
vegetables which is a lot more just
takes a lot more concentration and I
found myself I was probably taken in I
don't know 85 like I said 85 90 percent
of my calories now come from red meat
and like a nice fatty pork rib and it's
been awesome but I've kind of and tell
people started talking about the
carnivore diet I was kind of holding my
breath like am i [__] up my
microbiome am i moving myself backwards
in some way that I you know can't see it
and so at one point I pushed hard and I
went heavily vegetable because for
ethical reasons I would love to never
need to eat meat and I started to feel
like [__]
now it's entirely possible I just didn't
do it well willing to accept that but
sliding backwards into the most ignorant
way of getting in red meat and I feel
[__] awesome yeah I mean there's a
lot of stuff in there and so I would say
you know for one if we look at
biochemically what to humans need what
are our essential requirements there are
only essential amino acids essential
fats vitamins and minerals that's it
there's no fiber there's no final
neutral acquirements those are
conditionally may be beneficial but
they're not required so we look at
absolute requirements so if you're you
know rabid starvation too much protein
and I would say that if we look at
evolutionary I think probably most you
as we're getting about 30 to 40%
ocassion protein the rest majority the
rest would be from fat and then maybe a
few you know plant foods here and there
so I think you know when you go too much
on the protein for too long that's
that's that's a problem and we see that
with people and I did something similar
when I when I went from 300 pounds to
230 pounds and of course of three months
I did the same thing I you know I
exercise three times a day I cut my
caloric intake in half
you know just plowed through it like a
you know competitor I'm just going to do
it and and I was at working at a
hospital a nurse that says hey we like
that doctor Baker because you're not so
pissed off and grumpy all the time and
it's the same thing you can't sustain it
you're miserable you're hungry this is a
thing for a diet to succeed you have to
well the two things that make diets not
succeed are one you're hungry all the
time because you can't maintain that and
two the food sucks right so if you go
like I like eating Oreos and ice cream
and Twinkies and cake and cookies that's
good now you're gonna say I can't eat
that but what am I going to replace it
with well you're gonna replace it with
quinoa and kale and that kind of sucks
but you can say hey maybe if you replace
it with steak and eggs which are for
most people guys particularly has pretty
good stuff I can do that it says it's
satiety producing and it's also very
nutritious and again I don't necessarily
think everybody needs be a hundred
percent but when you get your
nutritional needs met through you know
meat whether it's in you might add eggs
you might add organ meat some people are
proponents for that some fish or
something louder a little bit of dairy
you are much more likely to be satisfied
you're much more likely to be able to
eat and frequently you know what when
the food is right I think the the atop
of G intermittent fasting happens
naturally and that's what happened like
when I eat twice a day and that's pretty
much my routine some days this once
occasion it's three times but it's just
because I eat enough I'm satisfied to
eat to my satiety and you think about
what other animal needs a nap to eat a
micronutrient able to eat you know a
dietician behind them telling them how
to eat I mean they just eat and they
don't have chronic disease and they stay
healthy so there should be a food for
humans where you can just eat to satiety
eat when you're hungry and maintain a
healthy level of body weight and avoid
disease and I think a meat-based that
seems
when I say seems to because I'm on a
very biased
you know I'm biased I see the results I
see the positive results I get every day
people sending me the results I'm very
much well this seems to be pretty cool
I'm excited to announce that Harvard
David Ludwig is going to be doing a
carnivore study you know this will be
this episode will come out after it's
been announced so so we're gonna be
starting to do that get more actual you
know real modern data on this stuff you
know what the study is gonna be are like
the thing I'm really curious about is
will it include organ Demeter we're just
talking like some burgers well it'll
include whatever people are eating so
we're gonna we're gonna try to get as
many people as possible there's a visit
of people already doing this is people
have already been doing it for six
months we're gonna it's going to be a
survey it's gonna be looking at their
blood work it's going to be assessing
their health you know you know obviously
they're there's a lot of you know
potential confounders and subjective
bias and something like that but it's
getting that in the literature and then
going from there and say look we have a
population of three or four thousand
people that have submitted to us to a
study and they are either maybe they're
all sick and dying or maybe they're
really healthy which i think the latter
is can be a case but so we did when we
get that into literature now we have
power to say okay now let's do some
intervention trials let's see what it
does for psoriasis let's see what it
does for rheumatoid arthritis let's see
what it does for depression because what
I'm seeing anecdotally yeah anecdotally
I'm just saying every day I get people
hey I had PTSD it's gone or it's gotten
it's significantly better no seriously I
had suicidal depression
I don't think about suicide anymore do
you think this is inflammation I think
the thing I think it's a combination of
things and so if we look at from a
mental health standpoint we know that
creatine carnosine carnitine taurine all
things are found almost exclusively in
meat now granted your body can make some
of that but when it's in lower levels
and we know that people on plant-based
diets have lower levels there's a nice
study in 2018 looking at carnitine
levels in people with major depressive
disorder their carnitine levels are low
when you supplement carnitine again
carnitine is a meat based product their
depression gets better so we see that so
it's probably one maybe reduction brain
inflammation but to also supplying these
nutrients that have sort of positive you
know brain cam
three of X and so the thought that
nutrition has no role in mental health
disease is mind-boggling to me that
people think it does it
I mean I'm how could it not I mean your
brain is just an organ like any other
organ in your body like your liver is it
subjected to the same environmental you
know goodness and badness that
everything else is and so why nutrition
wouldn't have an impact on brain health
also there's a connection to the gut
right though in terms of controlling
neuro chemistry huge influence serotonin
almost exclusively stored in the gut
release from there that one's crazy and
then the whole notion of leaky brain
syndrome right leaky gut and leaky brain
my parallel if you have a leaky gut you
probably have a leaky blood brain
barrier yeah that does seem very
striking that people would push back on
that one thing I want to know so like I
said I do sort of a lazy man's carnivore
diet you're the first person I've heard
talk where it's like hey it actually
you're not pushing organ meat really
hard you're even saying like maybe
grass-fed is a bit better but like grain
feds a lot better than going out and
eating a Twinkie so do I need the organ
meats I really don't want to yeah so
it's kind of interesting so I know
there's people that disagree with me and
like I said I my whole sort of sort of
belief system is let me see what the
results people are actually having the
way they feel or blood levels well
everyone all of us all of it you know
because you know the results are you
know generally are you reversing disease
are you improving body composition are
you you know can you subjectively and
objectively say you're healthier but
what if you're already healthy like I'm
a healthy dude I'm living a healthy
lifestyle since my mid-20s so I'm not
gonna be the guy where you see some
massive sweet I will say from my rabbit
starvation my doctor loved it because my
cholesterol was in the [__] sure sure
but I felt like death right cuz that was
nothing yeah that's a great example of
great labs but feel like alright so
that's what I'm trying to figure out
like so a guy like me what should I be
paying attention to because like you've
I've heard you say many times we're
never gonna know if this is gonna make
you live longer right that that is an
experiment that takes an entire lifetime
right so I don't [__] know
but I want like the best guess so
actually while its I guess it makes
people like sort of giggle under their
breath but okay erection like am i wind
up with an irregular or not I love
symmetric yeah how do I feel
psychologically a metric waist to height
ratio metric like I want to know like
what are the things that as doctors get
educated what should they be looking
forward to know whether to assign
somebody a carnivore diet and then what
should they be looking forward to know
if the carnivore diet has worked right
so I think you know we have such a sick
society there's a study came out that 88
percent of us are metabolically
unhealthy 88 percent there's only 12
percent of Americans that fit a criteria
of normal metabolic health parameters so
we've got such a this is why it's just
so important we have such a disaster and
it's only going to get worse and the
problem is with this you know obesity
diabetic diabesity epidemic that will
turn into a dementia epidemic and that's
impossible to take care of but so when
we look at you know you the healthy guys
so I would say now you're at performance
you know it's like how fast can I run
them on how fast getting around 100
meters right how much can i lift what's
my comp is money comes is like am i
waking up with a boner every morning you
know am i you know what where am i where
am i doing what do my joints hurt is my
back hurt you know those are the things
that really matter to you you could care
less what your LDL cholesterol is if
it's if it's 75 and you feel like
garbage it's like I don't really care
about that I want it I want to feel and
perform and do well you know subject ly
so that's part of my life experience
right you know the the thought of you
know what do we need to eat on a
carnivorous diet you know this is the
thing what I and I've done service I'd I
do to serve a couple months so I got
11,000 responses in 24 hours and we
asked them 25 questions what are you
eating you know the interesting things
to me were how many you were taking
prescription medications and how many of
you came off your prescription
medications and you know we didn't
stratify about my period of time it
could have been three months or less 70%
of those people drop their meds
you know and so it's like that
significant health improvement then you
say how many of you guys are eating
organ meats on a regular basis 15
percent so 85 percent of the people are
eating them either not at all or very
rarely to eat or
I I don't generally I mean IV you know
what it's offered to me if someone has
it I'll heat it I generally don't like
it are you eating it because you just
like hedging your bets no no I eat it
because I don't know offend the person
that cooked it for me I'm not eating it
because I'm worried about some
deficiency right I mean again if you
look at the people that have been doing
this diet the longest you know that the
pioneers the guys gonna do it the 2021
years they just eat steaks and ground
beef and they're fine
alright here's a random question for you
so watching a documentary on wolves the
Alpha always gets eat the liver I think
it is why would that matter if it
doesn't have some extra move so this is
I think one of the things with you know
when we look at animals okay usually a
predator animal is hunting a prey and
what's relatively lean protein is not a
concern on on a meat-based dot you're
gonna get plenty of protein what you're
not going to get is fat where is fat
located on a lean animal it's located in
the viscera so they go after the
perinephric fat the pericardial fat the
omentum this is where the concentrated
fat is and this is why we see that you
know we hear historical accounts of you
know like the polar
societies where they'll throw a the lean
meat to the dogs because I got plenty of
protein what I don't have is fat
remember fat is and that's why I
remember you with your sore wrists yeah
all eaten protein I'm like there's only
so much I can eat of that and then I
need some fat and so I think really it's
fat seeking here that's why we're
cracking bones to get the marrow that's
why we're eating brains because brains
are high in fat it's not necessarily
that there's some magical nutrient in
them and yes liver has more vitamin E
yes the liver has some vitamin C but I
don't think I mean again I don't have
scurvy I mean you know I mean it's I
haven't had vitamin C in any significant
quantity outside of what I get in steaks
in three years scurvy is a water-soluble
vitamin I would just get symptom within
a few months and then I would get sick
and so we're not seeing that now some
people again some people feel better on
that and I think some people that are
particularly vitamin depleted that's
probably a good strategy you know I
think some people I don't think you just
have to experiment like if you if you
sit there and choke down a liver because
you don't like it so I just come just
doing out of my duty and you say I
noticed no improvement or maybe there's
some placebo effect where you notice
something for a little bit if you don't
notice it consistently
maybe you don't need it yeah agreed I
can't let you go without talking to you
a little bit about the military your
experience is all over the [__] map
it's so fascinating like looking at you
I'm expecting a meathead but you're not
a meathead you're a surgeon you've
served in the military nuclear launch
office yeah yeah you see I used to be in
charge of hundreds of icy odd nuclear
warheads you know back in the Air Force
I used to be the guy that you guys saw
the movie war games back in the day I
was one of the guys who's down you want
to be that guy uh you know it was kind
of funny so I was in medical I went to
college university Texas what the
medical school got roped into playing
rugby you know this guy is getting a
Paul McCartney who was not the Beatles
but he had a gym so he said you know you
need to play rugby and so I started
playing rugby and then I liked wrong and
I end up being pretty good I got
selected on the western US team and the
all Texas team then I got recruited to
play in New Zealand so I was like I'm in
medical school and I was like [__]
I'm gonna play so I dropped out of
medical school much to the chagrin of my
medical school professors I liked you
you know you're a good guy why you doing
I was like man I wanna play rugby so I
went there and then I went into the
military as a nuclear weapons often when
I can't because I so I could continue to
play rugby for the military so I played
up until I was thirty and during that
time my day job was nuclear weapons guy
so this was just simply something to do
while I played rugby right and then I
then I got tired of I remember I was
playing this team from Russia I was
laying on the bottom of a pile this
guy's kicking me in the head I'm blood
coming out of my ears I'm white I'm 30
I'm done I want to go back so I went
back to medical school the military paid
for that and so when I got out they
immediately you know I needle II had to
repay my time to them as a surgeon so
they immediately sent me to Afghanistan
and this is like you know crazy crazy
time every reason look this is 2007 2007
old Afghan war and it was just all day
long every day trauma constant trauma
people being blown up the worst injuries
you could possibly see little kids you
know we took care of Taliban we took
care of you know the good guys the bad
guys the civilians it was it's nonstop
it was every single day how do you deal
with that like how do you
mentalize the trauma like even just
hearing someone scream I've got to
imagine like being back and hearing some
someone screen would bring that back how
do you like frame that how do you get
that yeah I mean it's it was such a
unique situation I mean combat trauma is
it's just not a normal I mean the
closest thing I ever saw as a physician
was a refinery explosion where we got
you know people getting blown up or a
train accident but but I mean generally
it's it's so out of the normal realm of
my existence I don't associate anything
normal day-to-day with that sort of
stuff I mean and when we were there it
was like you know all you did was you
know sleep wake up eat operate till
until you got tired you know try to get
some sleep sometimes operate in the
middle of the night and occasionally
exercise and that was it for constantly
every day and you're just exposed to
that and after a while you kind of
become a little bit of me into because
it's like you know it's like oh another
guy's legs blown off you know we're used
to that I remember when I first got
there it was kind of it was kind of sad
because I flew in through Kurdistan we
unload our stuff we're sleeping to this
giant hall like 300 guys on cots we go
in we hook up with the army who is we
were a lead we're the Air Force we were
leaving the army guys and the first
night at Aulis we got to go work and we
get in there and the first thing I see
was this poor I'm he's like a 23 year
old Canadian kid both legs blown off
above the knee you know a special ops
guy and full beard cuz they were both
full beard and special ops new second
holy [__] welcome to welcome to the war
you know this is in real life and it
just never stopped from day one it was
just constant constant constant drama
and you know I don't regret going
because I learned a lot and I was there
helping people and I was privileged to
be able to help people but it's it's not
a good place it's not it's not that you
know no one no one should ever look
forward to war yeah
what did you learn said you learned a
lot well I mean I learned how to
improvise you know to think fast on my
feet because when you're you know as an
orthopedic surgeon in the US you're like
I need this and you get all the
equipment you need but there you're like
I need a screw that's 44 millimeters
long like we got a 65 and a 21 21 so I
mean you know you don't you don't have
the right equipment the right materials
you're just trying to figure out how to
do the best you can with what you have
and so it's you know and it's
unpredictability
you know there's a lot of you know when
I when I was operating as a u.s. guy was
like my goal was to make surgery as
boring as possible it's like routine
everything the same way over and over
again that's what you want over there it
was like you don't know what you're
gonna get you don't know if you have you
could we ran out of saline we were in
where there's no water we're like we're
doing it's urgent we don't any have
saline to rinse wounds or wash our hands
I mean what are we gonna do and you you
just don't have a choice
so sometimes you learn that you can do a
lot more than you think you can and
that's really just incredible like I
can't imagine how that begins to shape
the way that you think did it change it
all the way that you think about people
about humanity about your job I think it
made me not fear things you know cuz I
was like anything that someone throws at
me I've seen much worse particularly
from a medical standpoint you know it's
it's kind of like I've seen the worst of
the worst that you can possibly imagine
and you know like I said as I do what
I'm doing now I get a lot of negativity
thrown my way and I'm like that's like
you know what what am I worried about
you know and so I just kind of laugh at
that stuff so it made me a harder person
a tougher pronoun not a mean person you
know I still care very much about people
but at the same time I'm kind of you
know imbued with this resilience to you
know keep forging ahead despite what
seems to be a lot of opposition because
I think what I'm doing obviously is
controversial you know with guarded diet
it's there's a lot of pushback there's a
lot of status quo that does not want to
be disrupted you know there are a lot of
people that are happy to provide you
with pills for your various ailments and
illnesses and and manage your disease
and that's a billion trillion dollar
industry and you know we're all thankful
that there's medications that may help
us in a certain situation but we would
much rather not have them in the first
place yes very much so
which leads me to my last question but
before I ask that where can people find
you online so I am active on social
media Instagram it's Sean sha WN Baker
bak ER 1 9 6 7 which is my birth year
I'm on Twitter at s Baker MD
a YouTube channel DeSean Baker and so
it's important we're starting a company
it'll be out by the time this comes out
called meet our XCOM it's going to be a
it's going to be a giant resource for
people that are interested in learning
more about that all the scientific
references that support this
we're gonna have some coaching component
for people that want to have some
support as they do this and so that'll
be something I'm pretty excited about it
then of course books coming out it'll be
out by the time this is episodes that
carnivore diet by Shaun Baker and you
know knock on something that it does
well nice man that's exciting so to the
end that we would much rather just not
get sick then have something to treat it
what is one change that people could
make that would have the biggest impact
on their health yeah I think I think
ownership taking ownership of your own
health is probably the biggest thing
people do because too many people
outsource their health to other people
and I mean you know I'll speak it as a
perspective as a physician yeah I want
to do it I want to help you but I don't
have as much invested in your health as
you do so you have to take ownership of
your own health and you have to be
willing to see what actually works for
you and so I think we have to step
outside the box and say what is actually
helping me be objective about it you
know you know measure what's important
to you not what's important to somebody
else measure what's important to you
because ultimately you've got to live in
that space you've got to live in that
body and if you know if your labs look
great but you feel like garbage there's
something still wrong so you have to be
willing to be your own you know guide
for some of this stuff all of that all
right guys I couldn't agree with that
advice more so take things into your own
hands you should be doing an experiment
on yourself you should be figuring out
what works for you it's always
interesting when people are so even keel
to have clearly a strong belief about
how things should be but can also say
that hey at the end of the day it's
gonna be up to you try it see if it
works for you if it does great if it
doesn't move on and try something else
and speaking of trying something else if
you haven't already be sure to subscribe
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're gonna get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential